---
title: Access—Ability
date: "2020-10-02"
layout: post
---

There's a feature of my iPhone that I love and use daily called Reachability.
You see, my phone's screen is bigger than my hands, making the top of the screen
hard to reach without straining my thumb when holding my phone in one hand.
Reachability allows me to swipe down on the bottom edge of the screen, bringing
the top contents of the screen closer to my thumb.

Considering the commonality with which important controls appear at the top of
the screen in iOS, this little convenience greatly increases my phone's
ease-of-use, making those controls easy to access. In case you haven't guessed
already, Reachability is a feature found in the iPhone’s “Accessibility”
settings.

All of us use accessibility technology, every single day. In fact, it's not a
stretch to say that _all technology_ aids accessibility, when the word
“accessibility” is taken in its
[strictest definition](https://www.lexico.com/definition/accessibility):

> accessibility (noun); The quality of being able to be reached or entered.

Computers give us remarkable access to a wide range of activities, information,
entertainment, and human connection. The handles on drawers permit us access to
their contents, yet I'm sure all of us have experienced poor ergonomics or
confusingly-designed handles. The infamous curb-cut—those little ramps that
connect a pavement or sidewalk with a street in a gentle slope—help ease travel
not only via wheelchairs, but also by bike or wheeling luggage across town.

Yet when we talk about designing for accessibility in tech, we fall victim to
the common misconception that we're designing for _disability_; for a minority
of users with special access needs. The reality is, designing for accessibility
means designing for _all_ your users, regardless of the ways in which they need
to access your product.

Put another way, designing for accessibility really means designing your product
in a way that makes it _widely available_, whether that means making your site
load as quickly as possible for poor connections, adding alt tags to images for
dropped connections, or adding subtitles to videos for people trying not to wake
a sleeping child.

In her book,
“[Accessibility for Everyone](https://abookapart.com/products/accessibility-for-everyone)”,
[Laura Kalbag](https://twitter.com/LauraKalbag) outlines four dimensions to
consider for making products accessible:

1. **Visual.** Make it easy to see.
2. **Auditory.** Make it easy to hear.
3. **Motor.** Make it easy to interact with.
4. **Cognitive.** Make it easy to understand.

Separating these dimensions from the subject of accessibility, it's easy to see
how these considerations are tenets of good design, period. And with just a
little adjustment in one's approach to design, we can make our work widely
available, and even enjoyable, to as many people as possible.

## Make it easy to see

Designing digital products implicitly puts visual design at the forefront. While
our access as designers to other senses—such as the sensation of touch through
vibration, or sound through spoken interfaces—is increasing, the screen is where
we spend most of our time. Advances in screen technology have also made it
possible for us to create designs with high dynamic range, in extremely fine
detail and at large scale.

But there's a difference between making designs that people look at versus
designs that people truly _see_. There's overlap in this distinction with making
designs _easy to understand_, as we'll see later, but there are some basic
things to bear in mind when thinking about visual design.

Colour contrast is often one of the first things people think about in the
subject of accessible design, and for a good reason

-   In Britain, around 4.5% of the population have some form of colour
    blindness[^1]
-

## Make it easy to hear

What does your design sound like? Many of us are familiar at least with the
_idea_ of screen readers—technology that narrates a screen’s contents using
text-to-voice synthesis—but few of us take the time to learn what the experience
of using this technology is like. It's also hard to realistically emulate;
people who live every day using a screen reader can listen to it at blistering
narration speed and navigate a screen with ease. It can sometimes feel
impractical to fumble your way through enabling and using a screen reader for
more than a few minutes (though as an exercise in empathy, I strongly recommend
doing so every once in a while!).

Instead, to answer _“what does your work sound like?”_, I like to ask people to
_describe_ their design. A good practice here is to avoid drawing your design in
a UI design tool before first writing down in plain language the contents and
structure of the design. This transcript helps you think about the right
hierarchy, relative importance, and most natural reading order for the elements
of a design. It also punctuates the importance of things like skip links, so you
can avoid reading through a dozen standard navigation items ("Home, About,
Contact, Press, Join The Team; Your Profile [...]") before getting to meaningful
information.

When possible, I even like to think of what changes we can make to a design to
make it _enhanced_ in experiences where the UI is narrated. One workaday example
of this is the HTML `<meter>` element.

The meter element is used to represent a value in a range, and is useful for
showing, for example, disk capacity or password strength. By default, the meter
element is relatively unassuming; it shows a coarse value represented as a
coloured bar inside a track, with the default colours being red, yellow, and
green depending on whether the value is optimal or sub-optimal.

Sighted users have to make an estimate for any exact values, unless the designer
chooses to add labels to communicate the value. However, screen readers can
enjoy a much richer level of detail, with the browser announcing detail like
"Meter with a value of 80; suboptimal. Maximum 100, minimum 0, optimal value
90."

They say a picture says a thousand words, and part of your job as a
designer—usually in collaboration with engineers and content strategists—is to
reverse-engineer the picture and think about what those thousand words should
be. Communicating effectively in writing is a valuable skill for any designer,
and doubly so when the writing is an instrinsic part of the user experience.

## Make it easy to interact with

## Make it easy to understand

[^1]:
    [https://www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness/](https://www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness/)
